RESEARCH

® Check for updates

ANIMAL COMMUNICATION

Extensive compositionality in the vocal system

of bonobos

M. Berthet!?3*, M. Surbeck*®+, S. W. Townsend??*6+

Compositionality, the capacity to combine meaningful elements into larger meaningful structures, is a
hallmark of human language. Compositionality can be trivial (the combination’s meaning is the sum

of the meaning of its parts) or nontrivial (one element modifies the meaning of the other element). Recent
studies have suggested that animals lack nontrivial compositionality, representing a key discontinuity with
language. In this work, using methods borrowed from distributional semantics, we investigated
compositionality in wild bonobos and found that not only does each call type of their repertoire occur in at least
one compositional combination, but three of these compositional combinations also exhibit nontrivial
compositionality. These findings suggest that compositionality is a prominent feature of the bonobo vocal
system, revealing stronger parallels with human language than previously thought.

quintessential feature of human language
is the capacity to combine elements. For
example, morphemes can be combined
into words (e.g., “bio” + “logy” = “biology”)
or words into sentences (“Biology is in-
teresting”). This is possible because of com-
positionality, whereby meaningful units are
combined into larger structures whose mean-
ing is determined by the meanings of the parts
and the way they are combined (J, 2).
Compositionality can take two forms. In its
“trivial” (or “intersective”) version, each element
of the combination contributes to the mean-
ing of the whole independently of the other ele-
ment, and the combination is interpreted by
the conjunction of its parts (3-5). For example,
“blond dancer” refers to a person who is both
blond and a dancer; if this person is also a
doctor, we can infer that they are a blond doc-
tor as well. However, compositional syntax can
also be “nontrivial” (or “nonintersective”): The
units constituting a combination do not con-
tribute independent meaning, but instead,
they combine so that one part of the combina-
tion modifies the other (3, 4). For example, the
meaning of the expression “bad dancer” does
not refer to a bad person who is also a dancer.
Indeed, if this person is also a doctor, we can-
not infer that they are a bad doctor. Here, “bad”
does not have a meaning independent from
“dancer”; rather, it complements it (3-5).
Compositionality as a phenomenon might
not be unique to human language. Numerous
studies in birds and primates have demonstrated
that animals are capable of combining mean-

‘Department of Evolutionary Anthropology, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Department of Comparative
Language Sciences, University of Ziirich, Zurich, Switzerland.
Institute for the Interdisciplinary Study of Language
Evolution, University of Zrich, Zurich, Switzerland.
Department of Human Evolutionary Biology, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA, USA. Department of Human
Behavior, Ecology and Culture, Max Planck Institute for
Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. “Department of
Psychology, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.
*Corresponding author. Email: melissa.berthet.ac@gmail.com

+ These authors contributed equally to this work.

Berthet et al., Science 388, 104-108 (2025)

ingful vocalizations into trivially compositional
structures (6-8). To our knowledge, however, un-
ambiguous evidence of nontrivial composition-
ality in animals from systematically collected
quantitative data is still lacking (3, 9-16).

In this work, we provide robust empirical
evidence for the presence of nontrivial com-
positionality in wild bonobos (Pan paniscus).
First, we leveraged a framework established by
Berthet et ai. (2) that investigates meaning by
considering all aspects of context that co-occur
with the emission of the signal. This approach
defines the meaning of a signal as the set of
features of circumstances (FoCs) that appear
at a rate greater than chance across the signal’s
occurrences (2). We recorded 700 wild bonobo
calls and call combinations (hereafter, vocal
utterances; table S1) and systematically col-
lected more than 300 FoCs for each utterance
(see materials and methods and table S2). Sec-
ond, using a method adapted from distributional
semantics, a linguistic approach that quanti-
fies meaning similarities between words (17),
we used these FoCs to map bonobo utterance
types within a multidimensional space (here-
after, semantic space) and quantify meaning
similarities between utterance types.

Last, to investigate whether the bonobo call
system is compositional, we applied a multistep
process previously used by Trujillo and Holler
to identify nontrivial compositionality in human
multimodal communication (2). Under this ap-
proach, a combination AB is considered compo-
sitional if (i) the meaning of A is distinct from
that of B, (ii) the meaning of AB is different from
that of A and that of B, and (iii) the meaning of
AB is derived from the meaning of A and B. The
fourth step determines whether a compositional
combination is trivial or nontrivial. More precise-
ly, the combination AB represents a nontrivial
compositional structure if it is compositional
[ie., it fulfils criteria (i) to (iii)] and if (iv) the
meaning of AB is different from the meaning of
A+B (see fig. S1 for an explicit visualization of the
process). Our study shows that all seven bonobo

4 April 2025

call types that were considered in our analysis
combine into four compositional structures, of
which three exhibit nontrivial compositionality.

Results
Semantic space of bonobo utterances

We adapted a distributional semantics frame-
work to investigate the meaning of bonobos’
call combinations in relation to single calls.
Distributional semantics is based on the dis-
tributional hypothesis, which states that words
with close meanings are used in similar con-
texts (17). Distributional semantics represents
word meaning in a semantic space by con-
verting each word into a vector so that rela-
tionships between words can be quantified
using geometric relations (18). We estimated
similarities between single call types and call
combinations of wild bonobos using a multi-
ple correspondence analysis (MCA) performed
on the FoCs. The MCA is similar to a principal
components analysis (PCA) but is conducted
on categorical data: It performs a dimension
reduction and then quantifies the statistical
relationship between a specific utterance type
and several FoCs (19) (see materials and meth-
ods). We found that the first five dimensions
of the MCA explained about 24% of the var-
iance in the data (15.00 + 3.12 + 2.46 + 2.18 +
2.14%). These five dimensions were used to
create a semantic space in which each utterance
was mapped using five-dimensional coordinates
(Fig. 1 and figs. S2 to S4). Utterances with a
similar meaning are closer to each other in the
semantic space than utterances with a different
meaning. These five-dimensional coordinates
were used for the remaining analyses.

Compositionality analysis

After mapping the meaning of each call type
and each combination, we investigated whether
the combinations were nontrivially composi-
tional. For this, we used a step-by-step process
described in Trujillo and Holler (72).

Chance value

For each call type, we calculated a chance
value representing the minimum Euclidian
distance required to conclude that another
utterance type has a different meaning from
that call type. This later allowed us to de-
termine whether distances between call types
and/or combinations are greater than ex-
pected compared with the natural variance of
the meaning of the single calls (table $3 and
materials and methods).

(i) The meaning of A is different from the
meaning of B

We investigated whether the single calls had
significantly different meanings from each other.
To do so, we calculated, for each possible pair
of single calls, the difference between (i) the
Euclidian distance separating the single calls

lofs

SZOZ ‘PZ [dy uo eIUsosITeD UIOYINOS Jo AjISIAATU Je B1O"9OUAIOS: MMM//:SdqIY LO, papropuMog

RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE

1.0
Pp
Peep_Whistle
Low-hoot_High-hoot,
® Peep_Peep-yelp
High-hoot_Peep-yelf” &
Whistle_Peep-yelp
0.5 A
Whistle_Peep Peep-yelp_High-hoot
Peep-yelp_Whistle QAwhistle
Peep_Yelp
S Peep_Grunt~»
3 Peep-yelp Q
N High-hoot
§ 0.0 Yelp_Peep Yelp Peep-yelp
5 Peep-yelp_Yelp
iS -hoot™ :
a Low-hoot: Beep Peep-yelp_Peep
ve
Peep-yelp_Grunt
0.5 Grunt
Yelp_Grunt
“1.0 »
-0.5 0.0 0.5

Dimension 1 (15.0 %)

vetle up,
Whistle_High-hoot

High-hoot_Low-hoot

Grunt_Yelp~ .
© Single call

© Combination

1.0

Fig. 1. First two dimensions of the semantic space of bonobos’ vocal repertoire. Call types and combinations are plotted in a semantic space based on their
inferred meaning (i.e., the FoCs associated with their emission). Utterances that have a similar meaning (i.e., that are emitted in similar contexts) are closer to each
other than utterances emitted in different contexts. Combinations (in blue) are in the form A_B.

and (ii) the mean of the chance value of the
calls. We then assessed whether this difference
was overall significantly different from zero
using a one-sample ¢ test.

The meanings of call types were significantly
different from each other (too = 4.63, p < 0.001).
Specifically, all call types had a different meaning
from each other except for three: Low-hoot had a
similar meaning to Peep-yelp and Yelp (Fig. 2)
because the difference between the pairs of call
types and the mean chance value of the calls
was less than zero (table S4).

(ii) The meaning of AB is different from the
meaning of A and the meaning of B

We then investigated whether the call com-
binations had a different meaning from that
of their constituents. To this end, we calculated,
for each possible pair of one combination and

Berthet et al., Science 388, 104-108 (2025)

one constituting call type of that combination,
the difference between (i) the Euclidian distance
separating the combination and its constituting
call type, and (ii) the chance value of the con-
stituting call type. We then assessed whether
this difference was overall significantly dif-
ferent from zero using a one-sample ¢ test.
The meaning of combinations was significantly
different from the meaning of their constituents
(tg7 = 7.36, p < 0.001). Specifically, all combina-
tions had a meaning different from their con-
stituting call types, except for two: Peep-yelp_
Peep and Peep-yelp_Yelp (Fig. 3 and table S5).

(iii) The meaning of AB is derived from the
meaning of A and B

We investigated whether the meaning of the
combinations was derived from the meaning
of their elements. Following Trujillo and Holler

4 April 2025

(12), we calculated whether the meaning of a
combination was closer to that of its constit-
uent elements than any other element. Stated
another way, we calculated whether the Eu-
clidean distance between a combination and
the call types constituting it was smaller than
the distance between a combination and any
other call type. For this, we calculated the pair-
wise Euclidian distance separating every single
call from every combination. We then ran a linear
model with distance as the dependent variable,
and an interaction between the combination type
(eg. Yelp_Grunt) and whether the single call was
a part of the combination (here termed the
“felationship variable”) as independent variables.

The meaning of combinations was closer to
that of their constituents at the repertoire level:
A likelihood ratio test detected a difference
between the full model and its reduced version

20f5

SZOZ ‘PZ [dy uo eIUsosITeD UIOYINOS Jo AjISIAATU Je B1O"9OUAIOS: MMM//:SdqIY LO, papropuMog

RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE

(i.e., the model without the relationship varia-
ble) (Figgs = 2.13, p < 0.01). Specifically, posthoc
analyses revealed that, for four combinations,
the distance separating the combination from
its constituting call types was smaller than the
distance separating the combinations from call
types that do not constitute it: High-hoot_Low-
hoot (fo5 = 2.07, p = 0.04), Peep_Whistle (to5 =
2.70, p < 0.01), Peep-yelp_High-hoot (tg; = 2.17,
p = 0.03), and Yelp_Grunt (tgs = 3.17, p < 0.01)
(Fig. 4 and table S6). Because these four com-

binations fulfil criteria (i) to (iii), they are all
considered compositional.

(iv) The meaning of AB is different from
the meaning of A+B

Finally, we investigated whether the four afore-
mentioned compositional combinations were
explained by trivial or nontrivial composition-
ality (12). We expected combinations exhibiting
nontrivial compositionality to have a meaning
different from adding the meaning of their

f Whistle
Peep-yelp
Euclidean
distance
fF Peep

|| <0
| 0-025

Low-hoot 0.25-0.5
0.5-1
Ff High-hoot
Grunt

High-hoot Low-hoot Peep Peep-yelp

Whistle

Yelp

Fig. 2. Meaning differences between call types. The meaning difference is represented by whether the
Euclidean distance between two call types is different from the mean of the chance value of these call types.
Call types that overlap in meaning have a Euclidian distance of zero or less (in black).

parts. Following Trujillo et al. (12), we built a
hypothetical additive combination by adding
the coordinates of the constituting single call
types. We then calculated the difference be-
tween (i) the Euclidian distance separating
the combination and the additive combination
and (ii) the mean chance value of the constitut-
ing call types of that combination. If that differ-
ence was greater than zero, we concluded that
the combination exhibited nontrivial compo-
sitionality. Stated another way, we added the
coordinates of A and B to create an A+B vector
and calculated whether the Euclidean distance
between A+B and AB was different from the
mean chance value of A and B.

For all compositional combinations except
Yelp_Grunt, the difference was greater than
zero (High-hoot_Low-hoot: 0.42; Peep_Whistle:
0.36; Peep-yelp_High-hoot: 0.21). For Yelp_
Grunt, the distance between the combination
and an additive combination was not greater
than the mean chance value (—0.02). That is,
Yelp_Grunt exhibited trivial compositionality,
whereas High-hoot_Low-hoot, Peep_Whistle,
and Peep-yelp_High-hoot exhibited nontrivial
compositionality.

Meaning of the utterances

In the final step, we derived a tentative mean-
ing for the single calls and the combinations to
illustrate how single calls combine into struc-
tures whose meaning is derived from the mean-
ing of their parts. We extracted the meaning
of each utterance type by determining which
set of FoCs is associated with the utterance
type at the repertoire level (see materials and

Yelp
Whistle
Euclidean
Peep-yelp — distance
<0
Peep 0-05
0.5-1
1-15
Low-hoot >15
High-hoot
Grunt

Fig. 3. Meaning differences between a combination A_B and its constituting call types A and B. Meaning differences between a combination A_B (e.g.,
Grunt_Yelp) (x axis) and its constituting call types A (e.g., Grunt) and B (e.g., Yelp) (y axis), represented as whether the Euclidean distance between the combination
and a constituting call type is different from the chance value of this call type. Combinations whose meaning overlaps with one of its constituting call types
have a Euclidian distance of zero or less with that call type (in black).

Berthet et al., Science 388, 104-108 (2025)

4 April 2025

30f5

SZOZ ‘PZ [dy uo eIUsosITeD UIOYINOS Jo AjISIAATU Je B1O"9OUAIOS: MMM//:SdqIY LO, papropuMog

RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE

2.0

a

1.0

0.5

Euclidean distance

kk

® Outside
@ Within

Fig. 4. Meaning difference between a combination A_B and single call types of the repertoire. Distance between the meaning of a given combination and that of its
constituting call types (in blue) and between the meaning of a combination and that of call types that do not constitute it (in pink). Boxplots indicate the lower and
higher confidence intervals, and dots indicate the estimated marginal means of the model. The symbols indicate significant differences (*0.01 < p < 0.05; **p < 0.01).

methods). Results are summarized in tables
S7 and S8.

The semantic analysis of the Grunt suggests
that it signals the ongoing activity of the caller.
Because Grunts are given in a large variety of
contexts (during grooming, resting, moving,
feeding), they may signal that others should look
at the caller to coordinate activities (“Look at me,”
in close interactions). High-hoots are emitted in
different contexts and seem to signal the presence
or location of the caller, especially in long-distance
settings or dangerous situations (“Pay attention
to me,” for a larger audience or more considerable
distances than the Grunts). The Low-hoots seem
related to high-arousal situations, such as the
construction of the night nest (20) (“I am ex-
cited”). The semantic analysis suggests that Yelps
and Peeps have similar meanings, used as im-
peratives to coordinate social activities. How-
ever, Peeps seem to be more used as suggestions
rather than strong imperatives: They are less
associated with changes in behaviors in the
audience and sometimes elicit vocal responses,
which could suggest a quorum-based or “voting-
like” system (“I would like to...”). Conversely, Yelps
are associated with changes in the behaviors of
the audience and no vocal response, suggesting
that Yelps are more of a rigid imperative (“Let’s
do that”). The meaning of the Peep-yelp also
varies with the context. It is mainly given during
group encounters or when building night nests,
maybe to coordinate intergroup interactions and
encourage other parties to join (“Join!”). Finally,
the Whistles seem to coordinate the spatial co-
hesion of the group (“Let’s stay together”).

The Yelps (“Let’s do that”) and Grunts (“Look
at me”) can be combined into the trivial com-

Berthet et al., Science 388, 104-108 (2025)

positional structure Yelp_Grunt, which seems
to incite others to build a night nest. The High-
hoot (“Pay attention to me”) can be combined
with the Low-hoot (“I am excited”) into a non-
trivial compositional combination High-hoot_
Low-hoot, which is used when another indi-
vidual is displaying, maybe to elicit a reaction
in the audience (recruitment, “Pay attention to
me because I am in distress”) or to stop the
display behavior of the other individual. The
Peep (“I would like to...”) can be combined
with the Whistle (“Let’s stay together”) into a
nontrivial compositional combination, Peep_
Whistle, which is used in sensitive social con-
texts, for example, during copulations or dis-
plays, maybe to attract attention or assert rank.
Finally, the Peep-yelp (“Join!”) can be combined
with the High-hoot (“Pay attention to me”) into
the nontrivial compositional structure Peep-
yelp_High-hoot, which seems to be used to co-
ordinate with other parties before traveling.

Discussion

In this study, we assessed whether bonobos com-
bine calls into larger compositional structures.
Using a holistic investigation of meaning de-
rived from distributional semantics combined
with a method for identifying compositionality
in multimodal human language (72), we found
that bonobos can combine all their calls into
four compositional structures, of which one is a
case of trivial compositionality (Yelp_Grunt)
and three (High-hoot_Low-hoot, Peep_Whistle,
Peep-yelp_High-hoot) are cases of nontrivial
compositionality.

Our findings have three important implica-
tions. In humans, compositionality is essential

4 April 2025

for generativity, a crucial hallmark of language
by which speakers can combine a finite set of
elements into an infinite number of combinations
that others can understand (27). Although most
investigations of the compositional capacities of
nonhuman species have been limited to one spe-
cific combination of a vocal system [for example,
(6, 7, 22, 23)], our study suggests that, in bonobos,
this capacity is not restricted to a few isolated
combinations. Indeed, each of the seven call types
we investigated here represents a building block
of a compositional structure. The first implica-
tion of our work is therefore that, akin to hu-
man language, compositionality is a pervasive
component of bonobos’ vocal communication.

Second, our data provide robust empirical
evidence that nonhuman animals engage in
nontrivial compositionality. In human language,
nontrivial compositionality is particularly im-
portant in facilitating generativity by allowing
meaningful elements to be combined into novel,
nonadditive structures like “bad dancer,” where
the meaning of the whole is more than the
meaning of its parts (12). Although a number
of studies have demonstrated that animals can
also combine meaningful vocalizations compo-
sitionally [see review in (8)], to our knowledge,
no study to date has empirically shown that
animals engage in complex nontrivial compo-
sitionality akin to that observed in human
language (II, 13, 24). Our results indicate that
nontrivial compositionality is not limited to hu-
mans and that bonobos, our closest living rela-
tive, also engage in nontrivial compositionality.

The extent to which our findings can inform the
evolutionary roots of linguistic compositionality
is yet to be determined. One interpretation of

40f5

SZOZ ‘PZ [dy uo eIUsosITeD UIOYINOS Jo AjISIAATU Je B1O"9OUAIOS: MMM//:SdqIY LO, papropuMog

RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE

the data could be that nontrivial compositionality
can be traced as far back as the last common
ancestor of bonobos and humans, 7 million to
13 million years ago (25). It is also possible that
the absence of evidence in other species has
been hampered by the lack of appropriate meth-
ods. Indeed, as we show here, detecting (non-
trivial) compositionality largely depends on the
capacity to reliably assess meaning and detect
compositionality across an entire repertoire.
Hence, a third important implication of our work
is that we present a method for reliably infer-
ring the meaning of all the signals of an animal’s
repertoire with minimal human judgment.
This method can theoretically be applied to
any taxa and any communication system (e.g.,
gestures, facial expressions, multimodal sig-
nals) to build a systematic survey of meaning
and compositionality across species, ultimate-
ly allowing for a comprehensive investigation
of the evolutionary pressures driving the evo-
lution of these capacities.

It is worth noting that our study does not
come without limitations, which might ex-
plain why the meaning of some utterance types
(e.g., Low-hoots or Yelp_Grunts) are difficult to
translate into human-relevant concepts. First,
some meanings might be emotionally expres-
sive (i.e, conveying information about the caller’s
emotional states), and future research should
include FoCs related to the caller’s emotional
state, using direct emotion measurements such
as infrared thermography (26). Second, our vocal
repertoire might not be of sufficient granularity
to capture the full complexity of the system: If
some call types have subtle acoustic variants
that convey different meanings, we may have
misclassified them as one single call type, pre-
venting reliable determination of their mean-
ing. Finally, similar to birdsongs, some call
types might have no meaning (2), which is not
accounted for in our approach; for instance,
the High-hoot might function to localize the
caller rather than convey a specific message.

Although our focus is on vocal combinations,
it is important to note that great apes also com-
bine signals from different modalities, exposing
the receiver to an array of additional multimodal
information that may refine or modify a signal’s

Berthet et al., Science 388, 104-108 (2025)

4 April 2025

meaning (27-31). For example, bonobos com-
bine Contest-hoots with different gestures that
potentially disambiguate the meaning of these
vocalizations, that is, whether they intend to
play with or challenge another individual (32).
The extent to which combining vocalizations
with other signals also modifies meaning in
potentially nontrivial ways remains unknown,
but it represents a critical follow-up research
avenue to this study (33, 34).

Our results (in particular, Fig. 1 and figs. S2 to
S4) suggest that bonobos use call combinations
in semantic areas in which single calls do not
occur. That is, bonobos seem to combine calls
to convey meaning that cannot be conveyed
through single calls alone. Testing this hypoth-
esis in the future will help us understand the
selective forces that have given rise to compo-
sitionality in both animal communication and

human language.

REFERENCES AND NOTES

1._B.H. Partee, in Compositionality in Formal Semantics: Selected
Papers (Blackwell Publishing, 2004), pp. 153-181

2. M. Berthet, C. Coye, G. Dezecache, J. Kuhn, Biol. Rev. Camb

Philos. Soc. 98, 81-98 (2023),

S. Steinert-Threlkeld, Philos. Sci. 87, 897-909 (2020),

J.R, Martin, thesis, Harvard University (2022).

T. Korbak, J. Zubek, J. Raczaszek-Leonardi, arXiv:2010.15058

[os.NE] (2020).

6. S. Engesser, A. R. Ridley, S. W. Townsend, Proc. Natl. Acad,
Sci. U.S.A. 113, 5976-5981 (2016).

7. M. Leroux et al., Nat. Commun. 14, 2225 (2023).

8... Townsend, S. Engesser, S. Stoll, K. Zuberbiihler, B. Bickel,
PLOS Biol. 16, 2006425 (2018).

9, J. Kuhn, S, Keenan, K. Arnold, A. Lemasson, Linguist. Ing. 49,
169-181 (2018).

10. P. Schlenker et al., Theor. Linguist. 42, 1-90 (2016)

11. M. Leroux, Rev, Primatol. 14, 16469 (2023).

12. J. P. Trujillo, J. Holler, Sci. Rep. 14, 2286 (2024).

13. U. Sauerland, Theor. Linguist. 42, 147-153 (2016).

14, P. Schlenker et al., Biol. Rev, Camb. Philos. Soc. 99, 1278-1297
(2024),

15. P. Schlenker, C. Coye, M. Leroux, E. Chemla, Biol. Rev. Camb.
Philos. Soc. 98, 1142-1159 (2023).

16. G. J. L. Beckers, M. A. C. Huybregts, M. B. H. Everaert,

J. J. Bolhuis, Front, Psychol. 15, 1393895 (2024).

17. Z. S, Harris, Word 10, 146-162 (1954).

18. G. Boleda, Annu. Rev. Linguist. 6, 213-234 (2020).

19. F. Husson, S. Lé, J. Pages, Exploratory Multivariate Analysis by
Example Using R, Computer Science & Data Analysis Series
(CRC Press, ed. 2, 2017).

20. T. Furuichi, in Bonobo and Chimpanzee, Primatology Monographs
(Springer, 2019), pp. 1-36.

21. M. C. Corballis, Cognition 44, 197-226 (1992).

22. T.N. Suzuki, D. Wheatcroft, M. Griesser, Nat. Commun. 7,
10986 (2016).

anew

23. K. Ouattara, A. Lemasson, K. Zuberbiihler, PLOS ONE 4, €7808
(2009).

24. P. Schlenker, E, Chemla, K. Zuberbiihler, Trends Cogn. Sci. 20,
894-904 (2016).

25. K. E. Langergraber et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109,
15716-15721 (2012).

26. G. Dezecache, K. Zuberbiihler, M. Davila-Ross, C. D. Dahl,
R. Soc. Open Sci. 4, 160816 (2017).

27. L. S. Ofta, W. Sandler, K. Liebal, Peer 7, e7623 (2019).

28. C. Hobaiter, R. W. Byrne, K. Zuberbiihler, Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol,
71, 96 (2017).

29. C. Wilke et al., Anim. Behav. 123, 305-316 (2017).

30. J. G. Mine et al, Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 78, 108 (2024).

31. M. Frohlich, C. P. van Schaik, Anim. Cogn. 21, 619-629 (2018).

32. E. Genty, Z. Clay, C. Hobaiter, K. Zuberbtihler, PLOS ONE 9,
84738 (2014)

33. K. Liebal, K. E. Slocombe, B. M. Waller, Ethol. Ecol. Evol. 34,
274-287 (2022).

34. K. E. Slocombe, B. M. Waller, K. Liebal, Anim. Behav. 81,
919-924 (2011).

35. M. Berthet, M. Surbeck, S. W. Townsend, Dataset and R code -
Extensive compositionality in the vocal system of bonobos,
figshare (2025); https://doi.org/10.6084/m8 figshare.c.7648628,

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the people of the villages of Bolamba, Yete, Yomboli,
Yasalakose, and Bekungu, who granted us access to their forest;
the Ministry of Research in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(ORC); the Institut Conglais pour la Conservation de la Nature;
the Bonobo Conservation Initiative; and Vie Sauvage. We also thank
the staff of the Kokolopori Bonobo Research Project, as well as
L. Zanutto and M. Rohée, for their help and support during data
collection. We thank G. Mesbahi and D. da Cruz for logistic support,
as well as E, Ahmad, L. Bierhoff, C. H. Chen, L. Fornof, G. Gordon,
and J. Vlaeyen for help and support during data collection. We also
thank F. Wegdell for conducting an interobserver reliability test.

We thank K. Slocombe, M. Leroux, and S. Watson for their comments
on the draft and C. Zulberti, A. Bosshard, |. Schamberg, N. Lahiff,
and J. Kuhn for insightful discussions. Funding: This work was
funded by Swiss National Science Foundation grants PPOOP3_ 198912
and 315130_192620 (S.W:T.), NCCR Evolving Language, Swiss
National Science Foundation Agreement #51NF40_180888 (S.W.T.),
and Startup from Harvard University (M.S.). Author contributior
Conceptualization; M.B., S.W.T.; Methodology: M.B., S.W.T., MS.
Data collection: M.B.; Funding acquisition: S.W.T., M.S.; Supervision:
S.W.T., MS. (fieldwork); Writing ~ original draft: M.B., S.W.T.; Writing ~
review & editing: M.B., S.W.T., M.S, Competing interests: The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data and
materials availability: The dataset analyzed in the current study and
the statistical script are available in the figshare repository (35).
License information: Copyright © 2025 the authors, some rights
reserved: exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement
of Science. No claim to original US government works. https://\ww.
science org/about/cience-licenses journatarticle-reuse

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
science.org/doi/10.1126/science.advll70
Materials and Methods

Figs. Sl to S4

Tables S1 to S9

References (36-63)

Submitted 6 December 2024; accepted 26 February 2025
10.1126/science.adv1170

5 0f5

SZOZ ‘PZ [dy uo eIUsosITeD UIOYINOS Jo AjISIAATU Je B1O"9OUAIOS: MMM//:SdqIY LO, papropuMog
